# Table of Contents
1. [Introduction](https://github.com/obullo/obullo-2.0/tree/master/docs/information#introduction)
  * [Getting Started] (https://github.com/obullo/obullo-2.0/tree/master/docs/information#getting-started)
  * [Installation Steps](https://github.com/obullo/obullo-2.0/tree/master/docs/installation#installation-steps)
2. [General Features](https://github.com/obullo/obullo-2.0/tree/master/docs/information#general-features)
3. [General Topic] (#general-topics)
   * [Obullo URLs](#obullo-urls)
   * [Controllers]()
   * [Working with Parent Controllers](#working-with-parent-controllers)
   * [Reserved Names](#reserved-names)
   * [Views](#views)
   * [Models](#models)
   
# Introduction


## Getting Started


### Getting Started With Obullo 2.0
-----
Any Any software application requires some effort to learn. We have done our best to minimize the learning curve while making the process as enjoyable as possible.The first step is to install Obullo, then read all the topics in the Introduction section of the Chapters.

### Read General Topics
------
Next, read each of the General Topics pages in order. Each topic builds on the previous one, and includes code examples that you are encouraged to try.Once you understand the basics you'll be ready to explore the package reference pages to learn to utilize the packages and helper components.

#General Features

## Summary of General Features


### Best Maintainability
------
If you have a development team and you want to easy maintenance and collaborative works Obullo right for you.

### Modular Programming ( Write your own modules )
------
Modular programming is, in essence, simply a programming technique and well realized in Obullo Framework. You can write your extensions and modules also Obullo support subfolders in modules directory.

### Obullo is a Free Application Framework
------
Obullo is a Php5 HMVC Framework licensed under an Apache/BSD-style open source license so you can use it however you please. For more information please read the license agreement.

### Good Debugging & Error Notifiers
------
Simple and effective debugging help identify and solve problems quickly.

### Obullo Generates Clean URLs and It works in Modules Mode as a Strict Rule
------
The URLs generated by Obullo are clean and search-engine friendly. Rather than using the standard "query string" approach to URLs that is synonymous with dynamic systems, Obullo uses a segment-based approach:
``` php
example.com/{module}/news/article/345
```
If a sub modules exists like a backend you can call without touching segments
``` php
example.com/{submodule}/{module}/news/article/345
```
Note: By default the **index.php** file is included in the URL but it can be removed using a simple .htaccess OR a nginx vhost file.

## Simple HMVC Library

Obullo has a simple HMVC library so you can write your own using extend it.

### Tasks - CLI and Ajax Support
------
Obullo has a integrated task functionality and Command Line Interface support who want to create command line tasks.

### NGINX Http Server Support
------
We tested the Obullo also on Nginx Servers, so you will do easy setup if you use Nginx.

### Validation in Model (Vmodel Class)
------
We use validation functions in model like ORM but not complex as ORM structure.

### Obullo Runs on PHP 5.1.2 and Newer
------
Obullo is written to be compatible with PHP 5. We focuses especially PHP5 Static Methods this subject very important in a PHP5 framework for the performance.
Take it advantage of new PHP5 functions, Enjoy it !

### Obullo is Light Weight
------
Extremely lightweight. The core system requires only a few very small libraries, Obullo use PDO extension for database operations. While you are using the Obullo you will understand well it why its light.

### Obullo is Thoroughly Documented
------
Programmers love to code and hate to write documentation. We're no different, of course, but since documentation is **as important** as the code itself, we are committed to doing it. Our source code is extremely clean and well commented as well.