

# Table of Contents
1. [Introduction](#introduction)
  * [Getting Started] (#getting-started)
  * [Installation Steps](#installation-steps)
2. [General Features](#general-features)
3. [General Topic] (#general-topics)
   * [Obullo URLs](#obullo-urls)
   * [Controllers](#controllers)

# Introduction


## Getting Started


### Getting Started With Obullo 2.0
-----
Any Any software application requires some effort to learn. We have done our best to minimize the learning curve while making the process as enjoyable as possible.The first step is to install Obullo, then read all the topics in the Introduction section of the Chapters.

### Read General Topics
------
Next, read each of the General Topics pages in order. Each topic builds on the previous one, and includes code examples that you are encouraged to try.Once you understand the basics you'll be ready to explore the package reference pages to learn to utilize the packages and helper components.

## Installation Steps

Obullo is installed in five steps:

1. Unzip the package.
2. Upload the Obullo folders and files to your server. Normally the index.php file will be at your root.
3. Open the **app/config/config.php** file with a text editor and set your base URL. If you intend to use encryption or sessions, set your encryption key.
4. If you intend to use a database, Obullo use PDO for database operations. Mysql and SQLite drivers installed as default for PHP 5 and newer versions.
If you want use another Db driver you must enable your PDO Driver in your php.ini file.For more details look at Php.net http://www.php.net/manual/en/pdo.installation.php
5. Open the **app/config/database.php** file with a text editor and set your database settings.

If you wish to increase security by hiding the location of your Obullo files you can rename the base folder to something more private. If you do rename it, you must open your main index.php file and set the BASE constant in the page with the new name you've chosen.

That's it!

If you're new to Obullo, please read the [Getting Started](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/getting-started.html) section of the Manual to begin learning how to build dynamic PHP applications.

[We have a wiki page installation instructions for Ubuntu OS.](http://wiki.obullo.com/#setting_up_php_and_obullo_framework_under_the_ubuntu)



#General Features

## Summary of General Features


### Best Maintainability
------
If you have a development team and you want to easy maintenance and collaborative works Obullo right for you.

### Modular Programming ( Write your own modules )
------
Modular programming is, in essence, simply a programming technique and well realized in Obullo Framework. You can write your extensions and modules also Obullo support subfolders in modules directory.

### Obullo is a Free Application Framework
------
Obullo is a Php5 HMVC Framework licensed under an Apache/BSD-style open source license so you can use it however you please. For more information please read the license agreement.

### Good Debugging & Error Notifiers
------
Simple and effective debugging help identify and solve problems quickly.

### Obullo Generates Clean URLs and It works in Modules Mode as a Strict Rule
------
The URLs generated by Obullo are clean and search-engine friendly. Rather than using the standard "query string" approach to URLs that is synonymous with dynamic systems, Obullo uses a segment-based approach:
``` php
example.com/{module}/news/article/345
```
If a sub modules exists like a backend you can call without touching segments
``` php
example.com/{submodule}/{module}/news/article/345
```
Note: By default the **index.php** file is included in the URL but it can be removed using a simple .htaccess OR a nginx vhost file.

## Simple HMVC Library

Obullo has a simple HMVC library so you can write your own using extend it.

### Tasks - CLI and Ajax Support
------
Obullo has a integrated task functionality and Command Line Interface support who want to create command line tasks.

### NGINX Http Server Support
------
We tested the Obullo also on Nginx Servers, so you will do easy setup if you use Nginx.

### Validation in Model (Vmodel Class)
------
We use validation functions in model like ORM but not complex as ORM structure.

### Obullo Runs on PHP 5.1.2 and Newer
------
Obullo is written to be compatible with PHP 5. We focuses especially PHP5 Static Methods this subject very important in a PHP5 framework for the performance.
Take it advantage of new PHP5 functions, Enjoy it !

### Obullo is Light Weight
------
Extremely lightweight. The core system requires only a few very small libraries, Obullo use PDO extension for database operations. While you are using the Obullo you will understand well it why its light.

### Obullo is Thoroughly Documented
------
Programmers love to code and hate to write documentation. We're no different, of course, but since documentation is **as important** as the code itself, we are committed to doing it. Our source code is extremely clean and well commented as well.

#General Topics

## Obullo URLs
By default, URLs in Obullo are designed to be search-engine and human friendly. Rather than using the standard "query string" approach to URLs that is synonymous with dynamic systems, Obullo uses a segment-based approach:
``` php
example.com/{module}/news/article/my_article
```
**_Tip_**: Query string URLs can be optionally enabled, as described below.
### Sub Modules
------
If you have a sub module like 'sub.backend' first you need to call sub module name.
```php
example.com/{submodule}/{module}/news/article/my_article
```
### URI Segments
-----
The segments in the URL, in following with the Model-View-Controller approach, usually represent:
```php
example.com/module/class/method/ID
```
1. The first segment represents the **module** that should be invoked.
```php
$this->uri->segment(0);
```
2. The second segment represents the controller **class** that should be invoked.
```php
$this->uri->segment(1);
```
3. The third segment represents the class **method**, or function, that should be called.
```php
$this->uri->segment(2);
```
4. The fourth, and any additional segments, represent the ID and any variables that will be passed to the controller.
```php
$this->uri->segment(3);
```
The [URI Class](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/uri-class.html) and the [URL Helper](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/url-helper.html) contain functions that make it easy to work with your URI data. In addition, your URLs can be remapped using the [URI Routing](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/uri-routing.html) feature for more flexibility.

If you have a **Sub Module** you can fetch sub module using $this->uri->segment('sub'), if submodule not found function returns to FALSE.
```php
$this->uri->segment('sub');
```
### Removing the index.php file
------
By default, the **index.php** file will be included in your URLs:
```php
example.com/index.php/module/news/article/my_article
```
### Apache HTTP Server
------
If you use Apache HTTP Server you can easily remove this file by using a **.htaccess** file with some simple rules. Here is an example of such a file, using the **"negative"** method in which everything is redirected except the specified items:
```php
DirectoryIndex index.php
RewriteEngine on
RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-f
RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-d
RewriteRule (.*)/public/(.*) modules/$1/public/$2 [L]
RewriteCond $1 !^(index\.php|obullo|modules|application|public)
RewriteRule ^(.*)$ ./index.php/$1 [L,QSA]
```
In the above example, any HTTP request other than those for index.php, **/public** folder, and **robots.txt** is treated as a request for your index.php file.

**RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-d**
If the request is for a real directory (one that exists on the server), index.php isn't served.

**RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-f**
If the request is for a file that exists already on the server, index.php isn't served.

**RewriteRule ^(.*)$ /index.php**
All other requests are sent to index.php.

### Nginx HTTP Server
------
Removing index.php file also easy in Nginx, add below the codes to your vhost file like this. Change the all **"/var/www/obullo.com/public"** texts as your web server root path.
```php
server {
        limit_conn   myzone  10;
        listen       80;
        server_name  obullo.com www.obullo.com;

        #charset utf-8;

        access_log  /var/www/obullo.com/log/host.access.log  main;
        error_log   /var/www/obullo.com/log/host.error.log;

        root   /var/www/obullo.com/public;
        index  index.php index.html index.htm;

        # START OBULLO FRAMEWORK REWRITE RULES
        # ( Obullo URI_PROTOCOL should be REQUEST_URI
        # / application /config / uri_protocol = REQUEST_URI )

        # enforce NO www
        if ($host ~* ^www\.(.*))
        {
                set $host_without_www $1;
                rewrite ^/(.*)$ $scheme://$host_without_www/$1 permanent;
        }

        # canonicalize Obullo url end points
        # if your default controller is something other than "welcome" you should change the following
        if ($request_uri ~* ^(/welcome(/index)?|/index(.php)?)/?$)
        {
                rewrite ^(.*)$ / permanent;
        }

        # removes trailing "index" from all controllers
        if ($request_uri ~* index/?$)
        {
                rewrite ^/(.*)/index/?$ /$1 permanent;
        }

        # removes trailing slashes (prevents SEO duplicate content issues)
        if (!-d $request_filename)
        {
                rewrite ^/(.+)/$ /$1 permanent;
        }

        # removes access to "obullo" folder, also allows a "System.php" controller
        if ($request_uri ~* ^/obullo)
        {
                rewrite ^/(.*)$ /index.php?/$1 last;
                break;
        }

        # unless the request is for a valid file (image, js, css, etc.), send to bootstrap
        if (!-e $request_filename)
        {
                rewrite ^/(.*)$ /index.php?/$1 last;
                break;
        }

        # END OBULLO FRAMEWORK REWRITE RULES

        # error_page  404              /404.html;
        # location = /404.html {
        #   root   /usr/share/nginx/html;
        # }

        # redirect server error pages to the static page /50x.html
        #
        # error_page   500 502 503 504  /50x.html;
        # location = /50x.html {
        #    root   /usr/share/nginx/html;
        # }

        # proxy the PHP scripts to Apache listening on 127.0.0.1:80
        #
        #location ~ \.php$ {
        #    proxy_pass   http://127.0.0.1;
        #}

        # pass the PHP scripts to FastCGI server listening on 127.0.0.1:9000

        location ~ \.php$ {
            fastcgi_pass   127.0.0.1:9000;
            fastcgi_index  index.php;
            fastcgi_param  SCRIPT_FILENAME /var/www/obullo.com/public/$fastcgi_script_name;
            include        fastcgi_params;
        }

        # deny access to .htaccess files, if Apache's document root
        # concurs with nginx's one
        #
        location ~ /\.ht {
            deny  all;
        }
    }
```
**Edit your config.php**

Finally you should do some changes in your **application/config/config.php** file.
```php
$config['index_page'] = "";
$config['uri_protocol'] = "REQUEST_URI";   // QUERY_STRING
```
If you can't get uri requests try to change your uri protocol which is defined **application/config/config.php** file.

### Adding a URL Suffix
------
In your **config/config.php** file you can specify a suffix that will be added to all URLs generated by Obullo. For example, if a URL is this:
```php
example.com/index.php/shop/products/view/shoes
```
You can optionally add a suffix, like **.html**, making the page appear to be of a certain type:
```php
example.com/index.php/shop/products/view/shoes.html
```
### Enabling Query Strings
------
In some cases you might prefer to use query strings URLs:
```php
index.php?d=shop&c=products&m=view&id=345
```
Obullo optionally supports this capability, which can be enabled in your application/config.php file. If you open your config file you'll see these items:
```php
$config['enable_query_strings'] = FALSE;
$config['directory_trigger']  = 'd';
$config['controller_trigger'] = 'c';
$config['function_trigger'] = 'm';
```
If you change "enable_query_strings" to TRUE this feature will become active. Your controllers and functions will then be accessible using the "trigger" words you've set to invoke your directory, controllers and methods:
```php
index.php?d=directory&c=controller&m=method
```
**_Please note:_** If you are using query strings you will have to build your own URLs, rather than utilizing the URL helpers (and other helpers that generate URLs, like some of the form helpers) as these are designed to work with segment based URLs.
### URI Extensions
-------
You can use uri extensions when you use ajax, xml, rss, json.. requests, you can dynamically change the application behaviours using uri extensions. Also this functionality will help you to create friendly urls.
```php
example.com/module/class/post.json
```
You can define allowed extensions from your application/config/config.php file, default allowed URI extensions listed below.
- php
- html
- json
- xml
- raw
- rss
- ajax

Using URI Class $this->uri->extension(); function you can grab the called URI extension.
```php
switch($this->uri->extension())
{
    case 'json':
        echo json_encode($data);
    break;
    
    case 'html':
        echo $data;
    break;
}
```
## Controllers
Controllers are the heart of your application, as they determine how HTTP requests should be handled.

- [What is a Controller?](#what-is-a-controller)
- [Hello World](#lets-try-it-hello-world)
- [Functions](#functions)
- [Passing URI Segments to Your Functions](#passing-uri-segments-to-your-functions)
- [Defining a Default Controller](#defining-a-default-controller)
- [Remapping Function Calls]()
- [Controlling Output Data]()
- [Private Functions]()
- [Class Constructors]()
- [Reserved Function Names]()

### What is a Controller? 
------
**A Controller is simply a class file that is named in a way that can be associated with a URI.**

Consider this URI:
```php
example.com/index.php/blog/start
```
In the above example, Obullo would attempt to find a MODULE named <dfn>/blog</dfn> in the MODULES folder and it attempt the find a controller named <dfn>start.php</dfn> in the /controllers folder and load it.

**When a controller's name matches the second segment of a URI, it will be loaded.**

### Let's try it: Hello World! 
-------
Let's create a simple controller so you can see it in action. Create a directory called <samp>blog</samp> in the modules folder

Then create <samp>controllers, helpers, models, views</samp> folders and which folders you need.
```php
-  application
    + config
-  modules
    + welcome
    - blog
        - controllers
           start.php
          helpers
          models
          views
```
Using your text editor, create file called <dfn>start.php</dfn> in the <dfn>blog/controllers</dfn> folder, and put the following code in it:
```php
<?php
Class Start extends Controller 
{
    public function index()
    {
        echo 'Hello World !';
    }
    
}
?> 
```
Then save the file to your <dfn>modules/blog/controllers/</dfn> folder.

Now visit the your site using a URL similar to this:
```php
example.com/index.php/blog/start
```
If you did it right, you should see <samp>Hello World!</samp>.

**Note**: Class names must start with an uppercase letter. In other words, this is valid:
```php
<?php
Class Start extends Controller
{

}
?>
```
This is **not** valid:
```php
<?php
Class start extends Controller
{
    
}
?>
```
Also, always make sure your controller <dfn>extends</dfn> the parent controller class so that it can inherit all its functions.

### Functions 
------
In the above example the function name is <dfn>index()</dfn>. The "index" function is always loaded by default if the **third segment** of the URI is empty. Another way to show your "Hello World" message would be this:
```php
example.com/index.php/blog/start/index/
```
**The third segment of the URI determines which function in the controller gets called.**

Let's try it. Add a new function to your controller:
```php
<?php 
Class Start extends Controller
{
    public function index()
    {
        echo 'Hello World !';
    }
    
    public function comments()
    {
        echo 'Dummy Comments .. !'; 
    }
    
}  
?>
```
Now load the following URL to see the <dfn>comment</dfn> function:
```php
example.com/index.php/blog/start/comments/
```
You should see your new message.

### Passing URI Segments to your Functions 
------
If your URI contains more then two segments they will be passed to your function as parameters.

For example, lets say you have a URI like this:
```php
example.com/index.php/shop/products/cars/classic/123
```
Your function will be passed URI segments number 4 and 5 ("classic" and "123"):
```php
<?php
Class Products extends Controller
{
    public function cars($type, $id)
    {
        echo $type;           // Output  classic 
        echo $id;                // Output  123 

        echo $this->uri->segment(4);    // Output  123 
        
    }
} 
?>
```
**Important:** If you are using the [URI Routing](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/uri-routing.html) feature, the segments passed to your function will be the re-routed ones.
### Defining a Default Controller
------
Obullo can be told to load a default controller when a URI is not present, as will be the case when only your site root URL is requested. To specify a default controller, open your <dfn>application/config/routes.php</dfn> file and set this variable:
```php
$route['default_controller'] = 'blog/start';
```
Where <var>Blog</var> is the name of the <samp>directory</samp> and <var>Start</var> controller class you want used. If you now load your main index.php file without specifying any URI segments you'll see your Hello World message by default.

### Remapping Function Calls
-------
As noted above, the second segment of the URI typically determines which function in the controller gets called. Obullo permits you to override this behavior through the use of the <samp>_remap()</samp> function:
```php
public function _remap()
{
    // Some code here...
}
```
**Important:** If your controller contains a function named <samp>_remap()</samp>, it will **always** get called regardless of what your URI contains. It overrides the normal behavior in which the URI determines which function is called, allowing you to define your own function routing rules.
The overridden function call (typically the second segment of the URI) will be passed as a parameter the <samp>_remap()</samp> function:
```php
public function _remap($method)
{
    if ($method == 'some_method')
    {
        $this->$method();
        
    } else 
    {
        $this->default_method();
    }
}
```
### Processing Output
------
Obullo has an output class that takes care of sending your final rendered data to the web browser automatically. More information on this can be found in the [Views](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/views.html) and [Output](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/output-class.html) class pages. In some cases, however, you might want to post-process the finalized data in some way and send it to the browser yourself. Obullo permits you to add a function named <dfn>_output()</dfn> to your controller that will receive the finalized output data.

**Important:** If your controller contains a function named <samp>_output()</samp>, it will always be called by the output class instead of echoing the finalized data directly. The first parameter of the function will contain the finalized output.

Here is an example:
```php
public function _output($output)
{
    echo $output;
}
```
Please note that your <dfn>_output()</dfn> function will receive the data in its finalized state. Benchmark and memory usage data will be rendered, cache files written (if you have caching enabled), and headers will be sent (if you use that [feature](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/output-class.html)) before it is handed off to the _output() function. If you are using this feature the page execution timer and memory usage stats might not be perfectly accurate since they will not take into acccount any further processing you do. For an alternate way to control output <em>before</em> any of the final processing is done, please see the available methods in the [Output Class](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/output-class.html).
### Private Functions
------
In some cases you may want certain functions hidden from public access. To make a function private, simply add php native <samp>private</samp> property and it will not be served via a URL request. For example, if you were to have a function like this:
```php
private function utility()
{
    // some code
}
```
Trying to access it via the URL, like this, will not work and Obullo will show "404 page not found" error:
```php
example.com/index.php/blog/start/utility/
```
### Class Constructors
------
If you intend to use a constructor in any of your Controllers, you **MUST** place the following line of code in it:
```php
parent::__construct();
```
The reason this line is necessary is because your local constructor will be overriding the one in the parent controller class so we need to manually call it.
```php
<?php
class Start extends Controller
{
    function __construct()
    {
        parent::__construct();
    }
}
?>
```
Constructors are useful if you need to set some default values, or run a default process when your class is instantiated. Constructors can't return a value, but they can do some default work.

### Reserved Function Names
------
Since your controller classes will extend the main application controller you must be careful not to name your functions identically to the ones used by that class, otherwise your local functions will override them. See [Reserved Names](http://obullo.com/user_guide/en/1.0.1/reserved-names.html) for a full list.

### That's it!
------
That, in a nutshell, is all there is to know about controllers.
