#General Features <a name="general-features"></a>

## Dance with Php

Obullo is a package based php framework that helps you quickly write mvc applications. It focuses on <b>simplicity</b> and <b>performance</b>.

## Some of the Features

### Best Performance

Obullo is really fast. The core system requires only <b>Obullo Package</b> and a few core <b>components</b>. We always do improvements on the core to catch the best performance. Please look at our speed tests for more details.

### Hhvm ( Hiphop ) Compatible

Obullo %100 compatible with hiphop virtual machine. [http://www.hiphop-php.com/blog/](http://www.hiphop-php.com/blog/)

### Best Maintenance

------

* Obullo has clear coding rules to fix the problems easily. 
* Console debugging functionality helps programmers to quickly find the issues.
* We keep the controller and view files as group under the modules folder, this helps create readable applications.
* Package manager <b>(Obm)</b> helps your packages to be always up to date.

### Packages

------

Package can be a helper or a library. The package manager <b>(Obm)</b> helps your packages to be always up to date. Using your <b>package.json</b> you can easily add new packages or replace the core components.


### Components

------

Components mean core packages which can be replaced with third-party libraries. Using your <b>package.json</b> you can easily add new packages or replace the core components.


### Obullo is Free

------

Obullo is a Php Framework licensed under an Apache/BSD-style open source license so you can use it however you please. For more information please read the license agreement.

### Good Debugging

------

Simple debugging from your console to help identify and solve problems quickly.

### Generates Clean URLs

------

The URLs generated by Obullo are clean and search-engine friendly. Rather than using the standard "query string" approach to URLs that is synonymous with dynamic systems, Obullo uses a segment-based approach:

```php
example.com/{module}/news/article/345
```

Note: By default the **index.php** file is included in the URL but it can be removed using a simple .htaccess OR a nginx vhost file.

### Simple HMVC Package

------

Obullo has a readable HMVC library. Hmvc helps programmers to increase application performance when request is sent between two controllers.

### Tasks and CLI

------

Obullo has an integrated task functionality and Command Line support.

### Nginx Http Server Support

------

We tested the Obullo also on Nginx Http Server, so it is detected that Obullo can be easily set up on Nginx.

### Odm ( Object Data Model )

------

Bye bye models which kills  productivity of the developer, instead, use Object Data Model <kbd>( Odm )</kbd> to validate and save the data using schemas. Look at <kbd>Odm Package</kbd> for more details.


### Obullo is Thoroughly Documented

------

Programmers love to code and hate to write documentation. We're no different, of course, but since documentation is **as important** as the code itself, we are committed to doing it. Our source code is extremely clean and well commented as well and we everyday update it on the <b>Github.</b>